README.md, before:

🐬 BCTool — Gene Expression Matrix Analyzer GUI

BCTool is a comprehensive graphical interface for exploring and analyzing large-scale gene expression datasets. It simplifies the process of transforming HCL files into Python-readable submatrices and provides accessible tools for biclustering, GO enrichment, and visual data exploration.

🔧 Features Overview

📥 Data Handling & Conversion

Multi-Format Compatibility: Supports CSV, TSV, Excel (.xls, .xlsx)

HCL File Interpretation: Converts compatible HCL text files into structured gene expression matrices

Automatic Validation: Performs file integrity and format checks during loading

🔬 Analytical Tools

Integrated Biclustering Algorithms:

LAS (Large Average Submatrices)

Chen & Church Method

ISA (Iterative Signature Algorithm)

OPSM (Order-Preserving Submatrix)

BiVisu with visualization support

GO Enrichment Integration:

Gene Ontology analysis for functional enrichment

Supports Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Component categories

P-value correction and significance testing built-in

Detailed Statistical Summaries: Outputs relevant statistical information for interpretation



📊 Interactive Visualization

Heatmap Display: Explore overall expression trends

Bicluster Visual Comparisons: Contrast algorithm outputs side by side

GO Term Visual Summaries: Examine biological enrichment results graphically



💾 Export Functions

Flexible File Output: Save results as JSON, CSV, or Excel

Export Options Include:

Bicluster details

Enrichment results

Processed matrix files



⚙️ Installation Instructions

Requirements

Python 3.7 or newer

pip package manager

Quick Start

python launch_gui.py

The launcher automatically installs required packages.



Manual Setup

pip install -r requirements.txt
python gene_expression_gui.py

Required Python Packages

pandas >= 1.3.0

numpy >= 1.21.0

matplotlib >= 3.5.0

seaborn >= 0.11.0

scikit-learn >= 1.0.0

scipy >= 1.7.0

openpyxl >= 3.0.0

tkinter (included with most Python distributions)






🖥️ Using the Application

Launching

python launch_gui.py


Loading Your Data

Method 1: Expression Matrix Files

Select the Data Loading tab

Choose Load CSV/TSV or Load Excel

The matrix should have gene identifiers in the first column and conditions/samples in the remaining columns



Method 2: HCL File Processing

Click Load HCL File to select a compatible HCL file

Press Convert to Matrix to transform HCL content into matrix form

Click Use HCL Matrix to proceed to analysis

Running Analyses

Navigate to the Analysis tab

Select the biclustering algorithms to apply

Start the process with Run Analysis

Results appear in the output panel

Visual Exploration

Open the Visualization tab

Available plot types:

Heatmaps for expression overview

Visual comparison of biclusters

GO enrichment charts

Exporting Outputs

Head to the Results tab

Select the desired file format (CSV, JSON, Excel)

Export biclusters, GO enrichment findings, or matrices






📄 HCL File Format Example

Supported HCL files should resemble the following:

version = "1.0"
dataset_name = "gene_study"

gene_data "MYC" {
  expression_values = [4.2, 3.8, 2.1, 5.6]
  chromosome = "8"
}

gene_data "EGFR" {
  expression_values = [3.1, 2.9, 4.0, 3.7]
  chromosome = "7"
}

experimental_conditions {
  condition_1 = "Control"
  condition_2 = "Treatment"
  condition_3 = "Recovery"
  condition_4 = "Extended"
}

metadata {
  organism = "Homo sapiens"
  platform = "RNA-seq"
}

📁 Project Layout

gene-expression-analyzer/
├── gene_expression_gui.py       # Main GUI interface
├── adapter.py                   # Algorithm adapters
├── GO_assessment.py             # Gene Ontology analysis tools
├── hcl_parser.py                # HCL file parser
├── launch_gui.py                # Application launcher script
├── requirements.txt             # Package dependencies
├── sample_data.hcl              # Example HCL file
├── README.md                    # This documentation
└── algorithms/                  # Biclustering algorithm modules
    ├── LAS_algorithm.py
    ├── Chen_Church_algorithm.py
    ├── ISA_algorithm.py
    ├── OPSM_algorithm.py
    └── Bivisu_algorithm.py

🛠️ Algorithms Included

Biclustering

LAS: Locates large, high-mean submatrices with significance testing

Chen & Church: Classic biclustering via mean squared residue minimization

ISA: Iterative method to reveal co-expressed gene modules

OPSM: Discovers order-preserving submatrices in expression data

BiVisu: Combines biclustering with visual output capabilities

GO Enrichment




Supports multiple Gene Ontology categories

Performs enrichment analysis with statistical testing

Visual output for biological interpretation

🛠️ Troubleshooting Guide

Issue

Recommended Solution


Import Errors

Verify dependencies with pip install -r requirements.txt


Memory Errors with Large Data

Subsample the dataset or upgrade system RAM (8GB+ recommended)


HCL Parsing Problems

Review HCL file structure against provided example


GO Analysis Not Working

Ensure internet connectivity for GO database downloads


Additional Help

python launch_gui.py --help

Check terminal messages for error details.



⚡ Optimization Tips

For datasets with more than 5,000 genes:

Start with a reduced dataset

Run algorithms separately to manage memory usage

Consider systems with higher RAM capacity



👍 Contributing to BCTool

To incorporate new biclustering algorithms:

Implement the algorithm in the algorithms/ directory following the adapter format

Register it within adapter.py under the ALL_ALGOS dictionary

Update GUI options accordingly



📜 License & Citation

BCTool integrates multiple published algorithms under their respective licenses. Review individual files for licensing details.

If you publish work utilizing BCTool, please acknowledge the source algorithms and Gene Ontology tools accordingly.


✅ Final Notes

BCTool simplifies complex gene expression analysis with a visual, user-friendly environment. Nevertheless, always perform appropriate validation to ensure research integrity.

Commit message:

Add basic tests and documentation

README.md, after:

🐬 BCTool — Gene Expression Matrix Analyzer GUI

BCTool is a comprehensive graphical interface for exploring and analyzing large-scale gene expression datasets. It simplifies the process of transforming HCL files into Python-readable submatrices and provides accessible tools for biclustering, GO enrichment, and visual data exploration.

🔧 Features Overview

📥 Data Handling & Conversion

Multi-Format Compatibility: Supports CSV, TSV, Excel (.xls, .xlsx)

HCL File Interpretation: Converts compatible HCL text files into structured gene expression matrices

Automatic Validation: Performs file integrity and format checks during loading

🔬 Analytical Tools

Integrated Biclustering Algorithms:

LAS (Large Average Submatrices)

Chen & Church Method

ISA (Iterative Signature Algorithm)

OPSM (Order-Preserving Submatrix)

BiVisu with visualization support

GO Enrichment Integration:

Gene Ontology analysis for functional enrichment

Supports Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Component categories

P-value correction and significance testing built-in

Detailed Statistical Summaries: Outputs relevant statistical information for interpretation



📊 Interactive Visualization

Heatmap Display: Explore overall expression trends

Bicluster Visual Comparisons: Contrast algorithm outputs side by side

GO Term Visual Summaries: Examine biological enrichment results graphically



💾 Export Functions

Flexible File Output: Save results as JSON, CSV, or Excel

Export Options Include:

Bicluster details

Enrichment results

Processed matrix files



⚙️ Installation Instructions

Requirements

Python 3.7 or newer

pip package manager

Quick Start

python launch_gui.py

The launcher automatically installs required packages.



Manual Setup

pip install -r requirements.txt
python gene_expression_gui.py

Required Python Packages

pandas >= 1.3.0

numpy >= 1.21.0

matplotlib >= 3.5.0

seaborn >= 0.11.0

scikit-learn >= 1.0.0

scipy >= 1.7.0

openpyxl >= 3.0.0

tkinter (included with most Python distributions)






🖥️ Using the Application

Launching

python launch_gui.py


Loading Your Data

Method 1: Expression Matrix Files

Select the Data Loading tab

Choose Load CSV/TSV or Load Excel

The matrix should have gene identifiers in the first column and conditions/samples in the remaining columns



Method 2: HCL File Processing

Click Load HCL File to select a compatible HCL file

Press Convert to Matrix to transform HCL content into matrix form

Click Use HCL Matrix to proceed to analysis

Running Analyses

Navigate to the Analysis tab

Select the biclustering algorithms to apply

Start the process with Run Analysis

Results appear in the output panel

Visual Exploration

Open the Visualization tab

Available plot types:

Heatmaps for expression overview

Visual comparison of biclusters

GO enrichment charts

Exporting Outputs

Head to the Results tab

Select the desired file format (CSV, JSON, Excel)

Export biclusters, GO enrichment findings, or matrices






📄 HCL File Format Example

Supported HCL files should resemble the following:

version = "1.0"
dataset_name = "gene_study"

gene_data "MYC" {
  expression_values = [4.2, 3.8, 2.1, 5.6]
  chromosome = "8"
}

gene_data "EGFR" {
  expression_values = [3.1, 2.9, 4.0, 3.7]
  chromosome = "7"
}

experimental_conditions {
  condition_1 = "Control"
  condition_2 = "Treatment"
  condition_3 = "Recovery"
  condition_4 = "Extended"
}

metadata {
  organism = "Homo sapiens"
  platform = "RNA-seq"
}

📁 Project Layout

gene-expression-analyzer/
├── gene_expression_gui.py       # Main GUI interface
├── adapter.py                   # Algorithm adapters
├── GO_assessment.py             # Gene Ontology analysis tools
├── hcl_parser.py                # HCL file parser
├── launch_gui.py                # Application launcher script
├── requirements.txt             # Package dependencies
├── sample_data.hcl              # Example HCL file
├── README.md                    # This documentation
└── algorithms/                  # Biclustering algorithm modules
    ├── LAS_algorithm.py
    ├── Chen_Church_algorithm.py
    ├── ISA_algorithm.py
    ├── OPSM_algorithm.py
    └── Bivisu_algorithm.py

🛠️ Algorithms Included

Biclustering

LAS: Locates large, high-mean submatrices with significance testing

Chen & Church: Classic biclustering via mean squared residue minimization

ISA: Iterative method to reveal co-expressed gene modules

OPSM: Discovers order-preserving submatrices in expression data

BiVisu: Combines biclustering with visual output capabilities

GO Enrichment




Supports multiple Gene Ontology categories

Performs enrichment analysis with statistical testing

Visual output for biological interpretation

🛠️ Troubleshooting Guide

Issue

Recommended Solution


Import Errors

Verify dependencies with pip install -r requirements.txt


Memory Errors with Large Data

Subsample the dataset or upgrade system RAM (8GB+ recommended)


HCL Parsing Problems

Review HCL file structure against provided example


GO Analysis Not Working

Ensure internet connectivity for GO database downloads


Additional Help

python launch_gui.py --help

Check terminal messages for error details.



⚡ Optimization Tips

For datasets with more than 5,000 genes:

Start with a reduced dataset

Run algorithms separately to manage memory usage

Consider systems with higher RAM capacity


🧪 Running Tests
----------------

The repository includes a small test suite powered by `pytest`.
After installing the dependencies you can run all tests with:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt pytest
pytest
```



👍 Contributing to BCTool

To incorporate new biclustering algorithms:

Implement the algorithm in the algorithms/ directory following the adapter format

Register it within adapter.py under the ALL_ALGOS dictionary

Update GUI options accordingly



📜 License & Citation

BCTool integrates multiple published algorithms under their respective licenses. Review individual files for licensing details.

If you publish work utilizing BCTool, please acknowledge the source algorithms and Gene Ontology tools accordingly.


✅ Final Notes

BCTool simplifies complex gene expression analysis with a visual, user-friendly environment. Nevertheless, always perform appropriate validation to ensure research integrity.
